# Gene-Expression-Analysis-Workflow
Gene expression analysis using DESeq2 and gene set enrichment and pathway building using pathfindR

# DIFFERENTIAL GENE EXPRESSION ANALYSIS OF GENES IN AIRWAY SMOOTH MUSCLE CELLS INVOLVED IN THE RESPONSE TO DEXAMETHASONE, A POTENT GLUCOCORTICOID USED AS A TREATMENT FOR ASTHMA 

## 1.Introduction: Gene Expression Analysis, Systems Biology

Asthma is one of the major non-transmissible diseases, with more than 235 million patients around the world. Moreover, a high percentage of patients have suffered from severe attacks and millions die every year as a cause of complications (Ghaleb, 2021). In this disease, the air passages in lungs narrows due to inflammation and tightening of muscles around the small airways. Different factors have been linked to the development of asthma, usually with no single direct cause. It can be a hereditary condition, as an effect of allergies, urbanization and lifestyle factors, exposure to allergens and irritants or other events affecting the development of the lungs (WHO, 2021).

Long term medication is required to control asthma and glucocorticoids (GC) as dexamethasone (DEX), have been used to suppress airway inflammation (Nabe, 2019). At a cellular level they act by binding to GC receptors. GC-GR complexes then inhibit different proinflammatory transcription factors. Even though this process is well characterized, there is not much known about the interaction of GCs in other cell types as in the airway smooth muscle (ASM) (Himes et al., 2014). Gene expression analysis of disease relies on characteristic genomic signatures for predictive prognostics rather than on traditional clinical assessment. This profiling is changing the approach to discovery of biomarkers (Kim, 2010). The results of gene expression analysis of this data would help understanding how the ASM genes respond to GCs and consequentially help improve current asthma therapies.

This study aims to do an exploratory analysis of the RNA sequencing data generated by Himes and colleagues and defining the gene with the highest response to the treatment. The workflow will start with an exploratory analysis of the data including quality control steps, transformation, normalization and finally a gene expression analysis. 

## 2.Description of Data Set

The original RNA-seq data used in this workflow is publicly available at the Gene Expression Omnibus Website under the accession GSE52778, published on Jan 01, 2014 and last updated on May 15, 2019. Additionally, it is available in the package *Airway (release 3.14)* and employed by the *RNA-seq workflow: gene-level exploratory analysis and differential expression* vignette (Love et al., 2019). The package and data were installed on Dec 05, 2021.  The raw data was generated by Himes et al., (2014) as part of the study *RNA-seq transcriptome profiling identifies CRISPLD2 as a glucocorticoid responsive gene that modulates cytokine function in airway smooth muscle cells*. The data is confirmed by RNA seq expression reads of primary ASM cells isolated from four healthy aborted male lung transplant donors treated with 1uM of DEX or control vehicles for 18h. Data is divided in treatment (trt)and control (untrt) and 8 samples were included.

## 3. Main Software Tools Description

The first package used in the workflow for importing and processing functions was tximeta. This tool provides scripts to import transcript quantifications from RNA-seq fastq files processing programs as Salmon, with an automatic attachment of transcript ranges and release information and other metadata (Love et al., 2020). The second, and main package used for the gene expression analysis was DESeq2. This is a software focuses on estimating variance-mean dependence in count data from RNA-seq assays and testing for differential gene expression based on negative binomial distribution (Love et al., 2014). In a comparison of programs for gene expression analysis made by Schurch et al., (2016) DESeq2 and edgeR outperformed other programs when less than 12 biological replicates in the analysis where used, while DESeq2 outperformed most of the programs when more than 12 were used. This comparison was made based on false discoveries. Added to this, DESEq2 has a very complete and updated vignette that guides the user through the whole workflow.
